Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute (CNCI)  is a cancer care hospital and research institute and one of the 27 regional cancer centres in India. It is located in Kolkata near Jatin Das Park metro station at Hazra More (crossing). It was formally inaugurated by Prof. Madam J.Curie on 2 January 1950, as Chittaranjan Cancer Hospital, named after Chittaranjan Das, who donated land and property for the cause. This campus( first campus) also serves as a cancer research centre.


== Second campus ==
In February 2014 Union Government cabinet approved expansion of the state-of-the-art institutes second campus estimated cost of ₹ 530 crore.
In 2020 COVID-19 pandemic situation Government converted whole newtown campus to a dedicated COVID-19 hospital facility to boost state's corona preparedness. On 19 August 2020 the institute started its OPD services from its 460 bedded campus at Rajarhat.
The campus at Newtown was built under the Union Ministry of Health. The building is equipped with all the latest facilities for cancer treatment including nuclear medicine, endoscopy suite, modern brachytherapy units, 650 beds (or 460 beds), accommodations for relatives of patients, and for doctors. Rs 1,000 crore was spent for this project and it was inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on 7 January 2022.
More than ₹530 crore has been spent, out of which around ₹400 crore have been provided by the Union government and the rest by the Government of West Bengal. Rajarhat campus recently got NABH recognition.


== Education & training ==
The institute running NBE accredited DNB specialized courses on Head & Neck Oncology, Pathology, Gynaecological Oncology for many years. From 2022 onwords NMC recognized WBUHS affiliated MD course on Lab Medicine and Radiation Oncology and super-specialty post doctoral degree M.Ch course on Surgical oncology started. From 2022 Institute with Jadavpur university Jointly run  Post M.Sc. Diploma Course in Medical Physics. Institute run multiple courses like Diploma in Radiological Technology, Diploma Radio Diagnosis, Post Doctoral Fellowship in Onco-Anaesthesia, Post Basic Diploma in Oncology Nursing under WBUHS affiliation.


== Achievements ==
On Feb 2023 a team of doctors done stereotactic radiosurgery on a septuagenarian to remove a tumour from the patient's brain. This was for the first time that such a high-end procedure has been done by a government hospital from the state.In March 2023 a group of doctors from Department of immunoregulation and immunodiagnostics done research and found that expensive Immunotherapy treatment may not work on a section of patients, Before the administration of the expensive therapy, patients need to be screened.


== References ==