The Bhagwan Mahaveer Cancer Hospital and Research Centre (BMCHRC) is located in Jawahar Lal Nehru Marg, Bajaj Nagar, Jaipur, Rajasthan. It is also popularly known as BMCHRC. The hospital is NABH and NABL accredited super speciality cancer treatment centre. The hospital is following international protocol for cancer treatment managed by K.G. Kothari Memorial Trust. The centre is committed to providing comprehensive care along with prevention and research in cancer. 


== History ==
In 1992, the initiative of establishing a cancer hospital in Rajasthan was put forward in August. The meeting was held in the presence of Late Bhairon Singh Shekhawat, the then Chief Minister of Rajasthan & Late Vidya Vinod Kala. The approval on the proposal to establish the centre was given, and the state government allotted 22166 sq. yd. of land for construction.
The Bhagwan Mahaveer Cancer Hospital and Research Centre was commissioned in 1996 by Navrattan Kothari and became operational in 1997 as a centre with values and concern for every patient. Started as a 50-bed hospital, it now has 300 beds, and an IPD block is under construction.


== Milestones ==
1997: Establishment of the hospital under the aegis of BMCHRC Trust.
1998: Establishment of women's wing of cancer care.
2010: Establishment of Dreamz foundation for treating cancer-affected patients.
1999-2014: Inauguration of a Palliative Care Ward, Facility of Radioiodine Therapy, and Positron emission tomography (PET) diagnostic machine.
2015: NABH Accreditation was awarded. An organ-based treatment facility was introduced.
2017: Establishment of AML (Acute Myeloid Leukemia) Ward, Hospice Ward, Started Laser Surgery & Introduce Gallium - 68 generator.
2019: Establishment of the Neuro Ortho OT (Operating theater) and Linear Accelerator (Varian Truebeam Stx / Halcyon LA) & New Brach Therapy Machine got installed.
2020: Advanced PET CT and gamma camera installed.
2021: MRI Machines got installed. Launching of Arogya Dham. Inauguration of Geriatric Oncology. NABL accreditation, Stone laying of cancer care Bhawan.
2022: Establishment of Bone Marrow Transplant (BMT) unit.
2022: Establishment of Linear Accelerator 4 Halcyon-E
2023:  Launching of "CANCER JAANCH AAPKE DWAR" Campaign, Oncology Wing started at Shekhawati Hospital Jaipur.


== Patient Care at BMCHRC ==
BMCHRC provides comprehensive cancer care to patients. The specialities include

Surgical Oncology
Neuro Onco Surgery
Ortho Oncology
Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery
Medical Oncology
Bone Marrow Transplant (BMT)
Radiation Oncology
Haematology-oncology
Gynecologic Oncology
AnesthesiologyIn addition to the above treatment, the hospital provides numerous clinical services to the patients, including palliative care, psycho-oncology, ostomy clinic, dietary services, physiotherapy, dental care, and preventive oncology.
Diagnostic 
BMCHRC provides diagnostic care to the patients through various diagnostic procedures including:
Nuclear Medicine 
Radiology
MRI
Pathology
Transfusion services
Microbiology


== Major Achievements ==
In 2023, Bhagwan Mahaveer Cancer Hospital & Cancer Care launched cancer screening Campaign CANCER JAANCH AAPKE DWAR for cancer screening at an early stage. Designed to identify the most common cancers in women & men includes Breast cancer, Cervical cancer & Ovarian Cancer, Lung cancer, Prostate Cancer and blood cancer.
In 2023, BMCHRC started Oncology Wing at Shekhawati Hospital Jaipur.
Since 2021, the Bhagwan Mahaveer Cancer Hospital has worked on several programmes. Over 189 children under 14 who were suffering from any of the three forms of curable blood malignancies — acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, acute promyelocytic leukaemia, or Hodgkin lymphoma - benefited from a one-of-a-kind fund.
During the financial year 2020–2021, the hospital spent 7.28 crore for free treatment for people under the Below Poverty Line (BPL).
In 2022, BMCHRC provided free blood cancer treatment to 199 children under its flagship welfare programme.
In 2017, the BMCHRC team successfully performed a unique organ reconstruction surgery to remove oral cancer in a 42-year-old patient.


== Awards and recognition ==
The institute has won awards in different categories by different organisations, bodies, and institutions over the years.

2016: Best Healthcare Trust Provider Award 
2013: Big Research Business & Service Excellency North India Awards
2013, 2014, 2015: Best Super Specialty Hospital - Oncology in Rajasthan (Organised by Innate Healthcare, Medical Tourism company)
2016: Best Healthcare Trust Provider Award
2017: Myfm 94.3‘s Rajasthan Excellence Awards
2018: State Level Productivity Awards
2019: Rajasthan Best Employers Award
2021: Bhagwan Mahaveer cancer hospital, Jaipur is Ranked No 1 Single specialty hospital in North zone and 5th at National Level by TIMES HEALTH SURVEY Survey
2022: Excellence in Cancer Treatment with cutting Edge Technology & Patient Care Award.
2023: Top Most Hospitals in India Award


== R&D and Technology ==
The BMCHRC uses state-of-the-art technology and medical equipment, including various diagnostic, treatment, aftercare, and research facilities available at the hospital.
Diagnosis forms a significant part of the hospital's outpatient department, with the hospital providing Radio Diagnosis, Pathology, Nuclear Medicine and blood transfusion and microbiology. Services provided by BMCHRC in diagnosis are the first of their kind in the state of Rajasthan such as four Linear Accelerators (True Beam First in Rajasthan) with Rapid Arc, IGRT, IMRT and 3D CRT, SRS, SRT, RPM, DIBH, Electron Beam therapy and Brachytherapy PET CT 16 SLICE (First in Rajasthan), and Radio Iodine Therapy (First & only in Rajasthan reserved for Thyroid Cancer Patients, Samarium Therapy & Gamma Camera).
In addition to these, the hospital has 6 integrated modular operation theatres, complete with all the latest modalities in cancer surgery like Laser Cancer Surgery and Micro Laryngeal Surgery. In addition to these, the hospital also has a special 14 bedded Surgical ICU, a 60 bedded daycare ward for chemotherapy patients, and a dedicated Pain And Palliative Care Department.BMCHRC is also well known for providing assistance and clinical trial grounds to researchers from around the globe. A testimony to this is the treatment of bone cancer using the hot dog technique, which is considered to be a boon for treating bone cancer in patients.The hospital conducted cancer surgeries on the leg using the hot dog technique. Using this technique, the cancerous bone is removed and made cancer-free by using radiotherapy and nitrogen in liquid form, after which it is again taken to the original place.


== Oncology efforts ==
BMCHRC has been involved in identifying and treating cancer in the state of Rajasthan and has implemented several initiatives in the rural and far reaches of the state.


=== Associated facilities and programme ===
Since 1999, the hospital has organised preventive oncology camps in rural Rajasthan. They have organised close to 1506 camps in 26+ years, with almost 2.25 Lakh benefactors of the program. These camps have also begun to cover villages and sub-urban areas of nearby states.
The organisation has teams of General physicians, oncologists, gynecologists, ENT specialists, radiographers, Paramedical & Nursing staff. In addition to this, BMCHRC has a special Cancer Screening Mobile Van and Women Health Van. These vans are equipped with Mammography, X-ray machines, dark room, laboratory & procedure room, all used for cancer screening and early detection.


=== Welfare Initiatives ===
In addition to the camps, BMCHRC has been running several different welfare initiatives to provide cancer treatment to underprivileged children, women, and families since its inception. This includes donation programs, special kids cancer units, no-cost medical and treatment services for children, and special programmes to cure thyroid cancer and stop the recurrence of breast cancer in women.


=== Financial and Other Assistance ===
The Power Finance Corporation (PFC) has given BMCHRC a loan of Rs 136 lakh to acquire a surgical operating microscope.


=== Services for international patients ===
BMCHRC provides services to international patients, including visa assistance, logistics of the stay, hospital arrangements, airport shuttle, and post-treatment tours.


== School of nursing and other training ==
In the year 2005, BMCHRC started the BMCHRC College of Nursing, where more than 1000 students have received formal nursing education till March 2022. The hospital also provides a Fellowship program in Oncopathology, Anaesthesia, Advance Reconstructive Microsurgery, Post Doctoral Certificate Course (PDCC) in Oncopathology, Internship Program in Psychology, Training Program in Advance Reconstructive Microsurgery. BMCHRC also provides palliative care training to improve the standards of medical care in the country. 


== References ==